.TH RPK 1 "2026-04-21" "rpk 1.2.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rpk \- a bash-based package manager using git repositories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rpk
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I package
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.br
.B rpk
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpk
is a simple package manager where every package is a git repository
containing an
.B .rpk/
directory describing how to build and install it.
Package bundles are versioned under a per-user or system bundle directory and
symlinked into the target tree using GNU Stow.
.PP
Most commands operate on a single package. The package is named as the first
positional argument
.RI ( "rpk package command args" ),
or inferred from the current git worktree when the command is invoked from
inside a staged package.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Enable debug mode (equivalent to \fBSELF_DEBUG=1\fR; turns on \fBset -vx\fR).
.TP
.B \-v
Enable verbose mode.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode; suppress informational output.
.TP
.B \-f
Force mode; for example, re-package a version whose bundle already exists.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS General
.TP
.B help \fR[\fIcommand\fR]
Print the top-level help or help for a specific command.
.TP
.B source
Print the packages source directory (\fB$SELF_SOURCES\fR).
.TP
.B repo
Print the packages bare-repository directory (\fB$SELF_REPO\fR).
.TP
.B target \fIhome\fR|\fIsystem\fR
Print the install target directory for the given scope.
.TP
.B bundle \fIhome\fR|\fIsystem\fR
Print the bundle staging directory for the given scope.
.TP
.B action \fIcmd\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Echo and execute \fIcmd\fR.
.TP
.B daemon \fIcmd\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Echo and execute \fIcmd\fR in the background; print its PID.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] info " msg
Print an informational message, tagged with the package name.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] warn " msg
Print a warning message, tagged with the package name.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] fatal " msg
Print an error message and exit with status 1.
.SS Version
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] identity"
Print the identity of the package.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] version"
Print the currently installed version of the package.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] versions"
List every version declared in \fB.rpk/versions\fR.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] major"
Record a new major version in \fB.rpk/versions\fR and commit.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] minor"
Record a new minor version.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] patch"
Record a new patch version.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] changelog " "[" version "]"
Print a GNU-style changelog for the given version (default: latest).
.SS System
.TP
.B platform
Print the detected platform name (\fImacos\fR, \fIdebian\fR, ...).
.TP
.B upgrade
Run the platform\[aq]s native package manager to upgrade the base system and
install missing prerequisites (e.g. \fBstow\fR).
.TP
.B init
Initialise the \fB.rpk/\fR directory in the current git worktree, set up a
local bare repository, and scaffold \fB.rpk/package\fR if missing.
.SS Query
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] type"
Print the package type (\fIuser\fR or \fIsystem\fR).
.TP
.B list
List all available packages visible under \fB$SELF_SOURCES\fR and
\fB$SELF_REPO\fR.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] show"
Print package metadata: name, worktree, dependencies, versions, current
version, type.
.SS Synchronisation
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] accounts"
Print the remote SSH accounts configured for the package.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] stage"
Clone the local bare repository into the source tree, or pull the latest
commits if already cloned.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] pull " "[" accounts "...]"
Pull from the local bare repo and from the given remote accounts (or every
\fI@\fR\-remote if none specified).
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] push " "[" accounts "...]"
Push to the local bare repo and to the given remote accounts. Creates a remote
bare repository if missing.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] release " "[" accounts "...]"
Like \fBpush\fR, and additionally \fBscp\fRs the current \fBrpk\fR script to
\fI/tmp/rpk\fR on each remote and invokes
.BI "rpk " "pkg" " update"
there.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] sync " "[" account "]"
Bidirectional fetch-merge-push with the given account, or every known SSH
account if none specified.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] drop " account
Remove the remote of the given account from the package.
.SS Dependency
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] depends"
Execute every script under \fB.rpk/depends/\fR to satisfy prerequisites.
.SS Bundle
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] bundles"
List the bundled versions already built for the package.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] cleanup"
Remove every bundle for the package other than the currently installed version.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] package " "[" version "]"
Run \fB.rpk/package\fR to produce a bundle under
.BR $(rpk\ bundle\ ...) "."
Default: latest version in \fB.rpk/versions\fR.
.SS Install
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] install " "[" version "]"
Ensure a bundle exists for the given version, then \fBstow\fR it into the
target tree; run \fB.rpk/install\fR if present. Default: latest version.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] delete"
\fBstow \-\-delete\fR every bundled version and remove the install record.
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] update"
Pull the latest commits (\fBstage\fR), then reinstall the latest version if
the package was previously installed. With no \fIpkg\fR, iterates every
package in \fBlist\fR.
.SS Package-specific
.TP
.BI "[" pkg "] commands"
List executables under \fIpkg\fR\(aqs \fBcommand/\fR directory.
.TP
.IB pkg " " cmd " [" args "...]"
Execute the package-local \fBcommand/\fIcmd\fR script with the given arguments.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
When set, enable \fBset -vx\fR tracing.
.TP
.B SELF_VERBOSE
Enable verbose output.
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppress informational output.
.TP
.B SELF_FORCE
Force re-package of an already-built bundle.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Defaults to \fB$HOME/.local/etc\fR. Used to derive \fB$SELF_CONFIG\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_CACHE_HOME
Defaults to \fB$HOME/.cache\fR. Used to derive \fB$SELF_CACHE\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Defaults to \fB$HOME/.local/var/lib\fR. Used to derive \fB$SELF_DATA\fR
(install records) and \fB$SELF_REPO\fR (bare repositories).
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.local/src/
Default source tree for staged package worktrees.
.TP
.B ~/.local/pkg/
User bundle directory. System bundles live under \fB/usr/local/pkg/\fR.
.TP
.B ~/.local/
Default user install target. System target is \fB/usr/local/\fR.
.TP
.B <worktree>/.rpk/type
File containing \fBuser\fR or \fBsystem\fR.
.TP
.B <worktree>/.rpk/versions
Tab-separated ledger of declared versions. Each line:
\fIversion\fR\ \ <tab>\ \ \fIcommit-sha\fR.
.TP
.B <worktree>/.rpk/package
Executable invoked by \fBrpk \fIpkg\fB\ package\fR to build a bundle for a
specific version.
.TP
.B <worktree>/.rpk/install
Optional executable invoked after \fBstow\fR during
.BR "rpk " pkg " install" .
.TP
.B <worktree>/.rpk/depends/
Directory of executable prerequisite scripts.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
General fatal error (\fBfatal\fR).
.TP
.B 100
Failure from an \fB.rpk/\fR package script (\fBdie\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stow (8),
.BR git (1),
.BR ssh (1),
.BR rsync (1)
